# wasm-rpc

## golem-wasm-rpc

Defines data types for [Golem](https://golem.cloud)'s remote function invocation and conversions between them.

- `WitValue` is the WIT-defined generic data type capable of representing an arbitrary value, generated by `wit-bindgen`
- A builder and an extractor API for `WitValue`
- `Value` is a recursive Rust type which is more convenient to work with than `WitValue`. Conversion between `WitValue` and `Value` is implemented in both directions.
- Protobuf message types for describing values and types, and a protobuf version of `WitValue` itself and conversion from and to `Value` and `WitValue`
- JSON representation of WIT values, as defined in [the Golem docs](https://learn.golem.cloud/docs/template-interface).
- Conversion of `Value` to and from `wasmtime` values

The JSON representation requires additional type information which can be extracted using the [golem-wasm-ast](https://crates.io/crates/golem-wasm-ast) crate.

## Host and stub mode

The `golem-wasm-rpc` crate can be both used in host and guest environments:

To compile the host version:

```shell
cargo build -p wasm-rpc --no-default-features --features host
```

To compile the guest version, has minimal dependencies and feature set to be used in generated stubs:

```shell
cargo component build -p wasm-rpc --no-default-features --features stub
```

## Feature flags
- `arbitrary` adds an `Arbitrary` instance for `Value`
- `json` adds conversion functions for mapping of a WIT value and type definition to/from JSON
- `protobuf` adds the protobuf message types
- `wasmtime` adds conversion to `wasmtime` `Val` values
- `host` enables all features: `arbitrary`, `json`, `protobuf`, `typeinfo`, and `wasmtime`
- `stub` is to be used in generated WASM stubs and disables all features, and generates guest bindings instead of host bindings


## golem-wasm-rpc-stubgen

The `golem-wasm-rpc-stubgen` is a CLI tool to generate the RPC stubs from a component's WIT definition.

## Generate
```shell
Usage: wasm-rpc-stubgen generate [OPTIONS] --source-wit-root <SOURCE_WIT_ROOT> --dest-crate-root <DEST_CRATE_ROOT>

Options:
  -s, --source-wit-root <SOURCE_WIT_ROOT>                
  -d, --dest-crate-root <DEST_CRATE_ROOT>                
  -w, --world <WORLD>                                    
      --stub-crate-version <STUB_CRATE_VERSION>          [default: 0.0.1]
      --wasm-rpc-path-override <WASM_RPC_PATH_OVERRIDE>  
  -h, --help                                             Print help
  -V, --version                                          Print version
```

- `source-wit-root`: The root directory of the component's WIT definition to be called via RPC
- `dest-crate-root`: The target path to generate a new stub crate to
- `world`: The world name to be used in the generated stub crate. If there is only a single world in the source root
  package, no need to specify.
- `stub-crate-version`: The crate version of the generated stub crate
- `wasm-rpc-path-override`: The path to the `wasm-rpc` crate to be used in the generated stub crate. If not specified,
  the latest version of `wasm-rpc` will be used.

The command creates a new Rust crate that is ready to be compiled with

```shell
cargo component build --release
```

The resulting WASM component implements the **stub interface** corresponding to the source interface, found in the
target directory's
`wit/_stub.wit` file. This WASM component is to be composed together with another component that calls the original
interface via WASM RPC.

## Build
```
Usage: wasm-rpc-stubgen build [OPTIONS] --source-wit-root <SOURCE_WIT_ROOT> --dest-wasm <DEST_WASM> --dest-wit-root <DEST_WIT_ROOT>

Options:
  -s, --source-wit-root <SOURCE_WIT_ROOT>                
      --dest-wasm <DEST_WASM>                            
      --dest-wit-root <DEST_WIT_ROOT>                    
  -w, --world <WORLD>                                    
      --stub-crate-version <STUB_CRATE_VERSION>          [default: 0.0.1]
      --wasm-rpc-path-override <WASM_RPC_PATH_OVERRIDE>  
  -h, --help                                             Print help
  -V, --version                                          Print version
```

- `source-wit-root`: The root directory of the component's WIT definition to be called via RPC
- `dest-wasm`: The name of the stub WASM file to be generated
- `dest-wit-root`: The directory name where the generated WIT files should be placed
- `world`: The world name to be used in the generated stub crate. If there is only a single world in the source root
  package, no need to specify.
- `stub-crate-version`: The crate version of the generated stub crate
- `wasm-rpc-path-override`: The path to the `wasm-rpc` crate to be used in the generated stub crate. If not specified,
  the latest version of `wasm-rpc` will be used. It needs to be an **absolute path**.

